So, it's morning, you require sustinance to fuel yourself for the coming day so you look in the fridge and discover a saran wrapped bowl of leftover plain mashed potatoes from dinner the night before.

It's time for Ukranian Breakfast Deruny (деруни)!

Sounds good? Here's what you'll need!

Approx. 1.5Lb of the leftover mashed potatoes (plain, no onion or savoury seasonings)
1 egg
3 Tbsp all purpose flour
1 Tbsp sour cream
Pinch of salt
For frying: Lard (ideally) or whatever oil you happen to prefer
For after frying: 1c. granulated white sugar and 3 ROUNDED Tbsp. ground cinnamon (more or less to taste)

Pretty simple, right?

Step 1: Combine egg and and mashed potatoes.
Step 2: Combine flour with egg/potato mixture.
Step 3: Combine sour cream with egg/potato/flour mixture.
Step 4: Add the salt to the mixture.
Step 5: Adjust density of batter. The batter should be runny enough to easily ladel but not too runny, like typical pancake batter really, if it's not, add a SMALL amount of water, stir and check consistency again
        Repeat until desired density is reached.
Step 6: In a deep skillet melt enough lard or pour enough oil to create a roughly 1 inch deep pool.
Step 7: Once melted, turn temp up to medium-high and let come to temp.
Step 8: Take a bamboo chopstick, wooden skewer, wooden spoon or similar wood item (even a twig off a tree or the ground from outside will work just make sure to peel all the bark off and give it a rinse first) and
        put it into the hot lard/oil so it touches the botttom of the skillet, if bubbles form your lard/oil is hot enough, if it doesn't bubble you're not to temp yet.
Step 9: Place heaping Tablespoons of the batter into the hot lard/oil.
Step 10: Fry on one side until golden brown in color, paying attention to how long it takes to do so, then flip to other side and fry for the same amount of time. Repeat the same procedure for the rest of the batter.
Step 11: While you wait for a batch to fry, take a large bowl and combine well the sugar and cinammon.
Step 12: As Deruny finish frying, immediately place them in the bowl of cinnamon/sugar and toss well. Store prepared deruny on a plate under the broiler in your oven on "keep warm" or similar to maintain crispness.
Step 13: Serve with apple sauce, raspberry, and strawberry jams to taste!!!

SLAVA UKRAINE!
